refactor entitlement proposal to apply to pods and builds (#1)
gabemontero/enhancements: enhancements/builds/entitlements.md

## Open Questions [optional]

> 1. We did *NOT* provide for multiple sets of entitlement credentials in 3.x.  There have been no official, RFE style registered requirements entitlements at a namespace level.  However, we've started to get (slightly) less official feedback that customers want this in a more automated sense (vs. the current manual steps).  At a minimum, and is noted below when alternatives are discussed, if namespaced entitlements are added with subsequent implementation after global entitlements usability is improved, it needs to be seamless, and we minimally need to agree now on what the order of precedence will be (with the take on that listed below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We did *NOT* provide for multiple sets of entitlement credentials in 3.x.  There have been no official, RFE style registered requirements entitlements at a namespace level.  However, we've started to get (slightly) less official feedback that customers want this in a more automated sense (vs. the current manual steps).  At a minimum, and is noted below when alternatives are discussed, if namespaced entitlements are added with a subsequent implementation after global entitlements usability is improved, it needs to be seamless, and we minimally need to agree now on what the order of precedence will be (with the take on that listed below).
```

Reviewer: in case it is not clear, I change `with subsequent implementation` to `with a subsequent implementation`

4. This solution requires a mutating admission controller that intercepts all pod resources.  There is an open question as to how that is packaged, either as a) a separate admission webhook utilizing libraries like https://github.com/openshift/generic-admission-server, or b) as a patch we carry on the upstream k8s apiserver

## Summary

In V3.x, all OpenShift pods (and therefore builds) had the customer RHEL entitlements mounted into the build pod automatically
and without further intervention after install "for free" because:

 - the ansible based installer required/forced providing your subscription information in order to install OCP
 - for reference, see [these docs](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.11/install/host_preparation.html#host-registration) and [these roles](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-ansible/blob/release-3.11/roles/rhel_subscribe/tasks/main.yml)
 - next, Red Hats's docker daemon installed in 3.x had specific logic that auto-mounted the host's subscriptions 
 into the container

In V4.x, with 

- the change in the OCP subscription model between 3.x and 4.x:  you don't subscribe RHCOS nodes (in fact they

> do not have or ever will the entire set of subscription manager RPMs, and any as discussed in some of the alternatives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do not have or ever will the entire set of subscription manager RPMs, and as discussed in some of the alternatives
```

TODO:  Still need some form of implementation details for this one if it remains in this proposal.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

The concerns for the implementation center around these questions:

- Delivery mechanism for subscription config/credentials to the cluster
- Where/How subscription config/credentials are stored on the cluster (e.g. what resources types+namespaces)
- In what form are the credentials provided (pem files, SubscriptionManager, Satellite)
- When/how does the pod or build consume the credentials (where consuming means the pod or build mounting it and, for builds, wiring the mount through to buildah)

#### Delivery Mechanism for the "encapsulation" of credentials

Discussion of how global secrets get defined on a cluster.

##### MultiCloud Manager/Advanced Cluster Management

"MCM" for future reference introduces a "klusterlet" which is [installed](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSBS6K_3.1.2/mcm/installing/klusterlet.html#install_ktl)
in the clusters it manages.

> MCM also introduces a "compliance" with a list of "policies" (all backed by CRDs) with the klusterlet will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MCM also introduces a "compliance" with a list of "policies" (all backed by CRDs) which the klusterlet will
```

As the title implies, a user with sufficient privilege would create the API objects we decide are the "encapsulation"
for the entitlement/subscription credentials at the namespace / cluster level we end up supporting.

#### Where/How do pods/builds get the credentials from (i.e. the precise form of the "encapsulation")

##### Global secret option

> This enhancement proposes a new concept of a "global secret".  Administrators will be able to define secrets in a unique namespace (likely openshift-config) and then configure a a CSI driver + Admission controller which will be able to inject those secrets into pods that request the content, based on a configuration the administrator provides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enhancement proposes a new concept of a "global secret".  Administrators will be able to define secrets in a unique namespace (likely openshift-config) and then configure a CSI driver + Admission controller which will be able to inject those secrets into pods that request the content, based on a configuration the administrator provides.
```

 - There are CSI volume and persistent volume types in k8s.
 - per [k8s volume docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#csi) the CSI types do not support direct
 reference from a Pod and may only be referenced in a Pod via a `PersistentVolumeClaim`

>  - To that end, one of the sidecar containers, the [external provisioner](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/external-provisioner.html), helps with this

Reviewer: Similar to your suggestion in https://github.com/openshift/cluster-samples-operator/pull/249, where we add a ref to this proposal and delete any repeat information, we should probably remove all these CSI factoids and simply add a ref to https://github.com/openshift/cluster-samples-operator/pull/249, no?

Author: yeah probably, can i leave that as a cleanup for you after you merge this?  you have a better understanding of CSI than me at this point and are probably better positioned to decide what minimal info needs to be provided here, vs what to defer to the lower level CSI EP.

Reviewer: yep that works for me

The current though is to go with one secret vs. multiple, but this can be adjusted during implementation if need be.

#### When does the pod or build consume the credentials

For pods, an annotation should be used to flag the pod as desiring credentials.  This can also allow the user to pick from multiple available secrets for injection.  The annotation needs to be sufficient to determine:

1. Which global secret to inject
2. Where to inject it (path)

For builds, an opt-in at both the `BuildConfig` level and global build controller config level (`BuildDefaults`) would be provided, where in the `BuildConfig` case it would be an API field addition under the `BuildSource`.  Something like `includeSubscription`.  And an analogous field name and type would be added to `BuildDefaults`. 

> The build controller in turn would supply the annotation(s) the CSI plugin and associated admission apparatus respects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The build controller in turn would supply the annotation(s) the admission apparatus respects
```

## Alternatives

1. A build only solution could entail the build controller replacing the CSI plugin and admission framework and mounting
secrets into the build pod.

> 2. CRI-O already has config options (see the [config file doc](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/blob/master/docs/crio.conf.5.md))  to specify host directories that should always be mounted into containers (i.e. `/etc/containers/mounts.conf` to override the default `/usr/share/containers/mounts.conf`), akin to what the Red Hat Docker Daemon used to provide with OpenShift V3.  Guidance in the early 4.x time frame has been around the cluster admin using the MCO post install to effectively update the filesystem of each node with the necessary subscription related files in a well known location that CRI-O would look for.  There is concern though using this through MCO from a couple of perspectives.  One, the MCO api is not natural for someone who wants to do something higher level like "enable entitlements for builds".  Second, using the MCO for any node update requires a restart of the node, which is onerous for this scenario.  Also note, the RHCOS team want to disable their current default setting of auto-mounting secrets from the host (i.e. creating an empty `/etc/containers/mounts.conf`), since RHCOS does not fully install subscription manager (and never will), and they have problems when only partial subscription manager metadata is available.  [RHCOS has the subscription-manager-certs installed but are missing the subscription-manager package which carries the rhsm.conf.](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1783393)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. CRI-O already has config options (see the [config file doc](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/blob/master/docs/crio.conf.5.md))  to specify host directories that should always be mounted into containers (i.e. `/etc/containers/mounts.conf` to override the default `/usr/share/containers/mounts.conf`), akin to what the Red Hat Docker Daemon used to provide with OpenShift V3.  Guidance in the early 4.x time frame has been around the cluster admin using the MCO post install to effectively update the filesystem of each node with the necessary subscription related files in a well known location that CRI-O would look for.  There are some concerns though about using MCO for this purpose.  One, the MCO api is not natural for someone who wants to do something higher level like "enable entitlements for builds".  Second, using the MCO for any node update requires a restart of the node, which is onerous for this scenario.  Also note, the RHCOS team wants to disable their current default setting of auto-mounting secrets from the host (i.e. creating an empty `/etc/containers/mounts.conf`), since RHCOS does not fully install subscription manager (and never will), and they have problems when only partial subscription manager metadata is available.  [RHCOS has the subscription-manager-certs installed but are missing the subscription-manager package which carries the rhsm.conf.](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1783393)
```
